content/modules/ROOT/pages/05-mock.adoc, before:

== Building with mock

Your final challenge is to build the *pello* package with *mock* instead
of *rpmbuild*. This will allow you to build a package that is compatible
with RHEL 8, even though the build host is RHEL 9.

This challenge uses files that you created during the *pello* challenge,
so if you skipped it you need to go back and complete it by clicking the
"`Progress`" button in the top right.

Expand the section headers below to work on each section of this
challenge.

== Install and configure mock

[%collapsible]
====
Mock is not part of RHEL. It is available from the EPEL (Extra Packages
for Enterprise Linux) repository. Some packages in EPEL have
dependencies from the CodeReady Builder repository.

Use the *subscription-manager* command to enable the CodeReady Builder
repository.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo subscription-manager repos --enable codeready-builder-for-rhel-10-x86_64-rpms
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Repository 'codeready-builder-for-rhel-9-x86_64-rpms' is enabled for this system.
----

Enable the EPEL repository. This is accomplished by installing the
*epel-release* package.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo dnf -y install https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-10.noarch.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Installing:
 epel-release           noarch      9-7.el10        @commandline       18 k
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
----

Install the *mock* package from EPEL.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo dnf -y install mock
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Installing:
 mock                noarch   5.5-1.el10        epel                               210 k
Installing dependencies:
 conmon              x86_64   2:2.1.10-1.el10   rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms    54 k
 containers-common   x86_64   2:1-91.el10_4     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   142 k
 createrepo_c        x86_64   0.20.1-2.el10     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms    80 k
 createrepo_c-libs   x86_64   0.20.1-2.el10     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   102 k
 criu                x86_64   3.19-1.el10       rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   563 k
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
----

In order to use *mock*, a user must be a member of the *mock* group.

Use the *gpasswd* command to add the *rhel* user to the *mock* group.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo gpasswd --add rhel mock
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Adding user root to group mock
----

You can use the *groups* command to verify the group membership.

[source,bash]
----
groups rhel
----

[source,nocopy]
----
rhel : rhel wheel mock
----

Start a new login shell to have the new group membership take effect.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo -iu rhel
----

Expand the next section header to continue the challenge.

====

== Build with mock from a source package

Navigate to the *rpmbuild* directory.

[source,bash,run]
----
cd /home/rhel/rpmbuild
----

Use the *mock* command to build *pello* for RHEL 8 from the previously
built source package. This will take a bit longer to run than the
*rpmbuild* command, because it must create the chroot environment.

[source,bash,run]
----
mock --root rhel-8-x86_64 SRPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Wrote: /builddir/build/RPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el8.noarch.rpm
Finish: rpmbuild pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
Finish: build phase for pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
INFO: Done(SRPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm) Config(rhel-8-x86_64) 0 minutes 26 seconds
INFO: Results and/or logs in: /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result
Finish: run
----

The output from the last command shows the resulting packages are
located in the */var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result* directory.

Use the *rpm* command to show the dependency on *python(abi)* in this
package. The version of this dependency corresponds to the default
Python version (3.6) in RHEL 8.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --requires --package /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-1.el8.noarch.rpm | grep 'python(abi)'
----

[source,nocopy]
----
python(abi) = 3.12
----

Now do the same for the package you built earlier with *rpmbuild*. The
version of this dependency corresponds to the default Python version
(3.12) in RHEL 10.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --requires --package RPMS/noarch/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.noarch.rpm | grep 'python(abi)'
----

[source,nocopy]
----
python(abi) = 3.9
----

Expand the next section header to continue the challenge.

== Build with mock from a spec file

In addition to rebuilding source packages, *mock* is also able to build
directly from a spec file and the corresponding sources. Before you do
this, increment the *Release* in the *pello* spec file using
*rpmdev-bumpspec*, which will also add the appropriate changelog entry.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpmdev-bumpspec --comment 'Rebuild' SPECS/pello.spec
----

Use *mock* to build *pello* for RHEL 8 from the *pello* spec file and
the *SOURCES* directory. This will be a bit faster than the first time
you ran *mock* thanks to the chroot being cached, although still not
quite as fast as running *rpmbuild* directly.

[source,bash,run]
----
mock --root rhel-8-x86_64 --spec SPECS/pello.spec --sources SOURCES
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Wrote: /builddir/build/RPMS/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.noarch.rpm
Finish: rpmbuild pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
Finish: build phase for pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
INFO: Done(/var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm) Config(rhel-8-x86_64) 0 minutes 12 seconds
INFO: Results and/or logs in: /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result
Finish: run
----

Use *rpm* to inspect the resulting package.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --info --package /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.noarch.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Name        : pello
Version     : 1.0.4
Release     : 2.el8
Architecture: noarch
Install Date: (not installed)
Group       : Unspecified
Size        : 7359
License     : MIT
Signature   : (none)
Source RPM  : pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
Build Date  : Fri 26 Jan 2024 07:50:11 AM UTC
Build Host  : localhost.localdomain
URL         : https://github.com/fedora-python/Pello
Summary     : An example Python Hello World package
Description :
Pello is an example package that will be used as a part of Fedora Python
Packaging Guidelines.  The only thing that this package does is printing
Hello World! on the command line.
----

That concludes this challenge, which is the final challenge for this
track.

Commit message:

Add collapsible sections and update README for lab requirements: Introduced collapsible sections in multiple challenge documents for better navigation and clarity, and added a README file outlining necessary external sources for the lab setup.

content/modules/ROOT/pages/05-mock.adoc, after:

== Building with mock

Your final challenge is to build the *pello* package with *mock* instead
of *rpmbuild*. This will allow you to build a package that is compatible
with RHEL 8, even though the build host is RHEL 9.

This challenge uses files that you created during the *pello* challenge,
so if you skipped it you need to go back and complete it by clicking the
"`Progress`" button in the top right.

Expand the section headers below to work on each section of this
challenge.

== Install and configure mock

[%collapsible]
====
Mock is not part of RHEL. It is available from the EPEL (Extra Packages
for Enterprise Linux) repository. Some packages in EPEL have
dependencies from the CodeReady Builder repository.

Use the *subscription-manager* command to enable the CodeReady Builder
repository.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo subscription-manager repos --enable codeready-builder-for-rhel-10-x86_64-rpms
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Repository 'codeready-builder-for-rhel-9-x86_64-rpms' is enabled for this system.
----

Enable the EPEL repository. This is accomplished by installing the
*epel-release* package.

NOTE: The EPEL repository is already enabled. You may run the command below to confirm.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo dnf -y install https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-10.noarch.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Installing:
 epel-release           noarch      9-7.el10        @commandline       18 k
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
----

Install the *mock* package from EPEL.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo dnf -y install mock
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Installing:
 mock                noarch   5.5-1.el10        epel                               210 k
Installing dependencies:
 conmon              x86_64   2:2.1.10-1.el10   rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms    54 k
 containers-common   x86_64   2:1-91.el10_4     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   142 k
 createrepo_c        x86_64   0.20.1-2.el10     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms    80 k
 createrepo_c-libs   x86_64   0.20.1-2.el10     rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   102 k
 criu                x86_64   3.19-1.el10       rhel-9-for-x86_64-appstream-rpms   563 k
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
----

In order to use *mock*, a user must be a member of the *mock* group.

Use the *gpasswd* command to add the *rhel* user to the *mock* group.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo gpasswd --add rhel mock
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Adding user root to group mock
----

You can use the *groups* command to verify the group membership.

[source,bash]
----
groups rhel
----

[source,nocopy]
----
rhel : rhel wheel mock
----

Start a new login shell to have the new group membership take effect.

[source,bash,run]
----
sudo -iu rhel
----

Expand the next section header to continue the challenge.

====

== Build with mock from a source package

[%collapsible]
====

Navigate to the *rpmbuild* directory.

[source,bash,run]
----
cd /home/rhel/rpmbuild
----

Use the *mock* command to build *pello* for RHEL 8 from the previously
built source package. This will take a bit longer to run than the
*rpmbuild* command, because it must create the chroot environment.

[source,bash,run]
----
mock --root rhel-8-x86_64 SRPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Wrote: /builddir/build/RPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el8.noarch.rpm
Finish: rpmbuild pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
Finish: build phase for pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm
INFO: Done(SRPMS/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.src.rpm) Config(rhel-8-x86_64) 0 minutes 26 seconds
INFO: Results and/or logs in: /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result
Finish: run
----

The output from the last command shows the resulting packages are
located in the */var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result* directory.

Use the *rpm* command to show the dependency on *python(abi)* in this
package. The version of this dependency corresponds to the default
Python version (3.6) in RHEL 8.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --requires --package /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-1.el8.noarch.rpm | grep 'python(abi)'
----

[source,nocopy]
----
python(abi) = 3.12
----

Now do the same for the package you built earlier with *rpmbuild*. The
version of this dependency corresponds to the default Python version
(3.12) in RHEL 10.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --requires --package RPMS/noarch/pello-1.0.4-1.el10.noarch.rpm | grep 'python(abi)'
----

[source,nocopy]
----
python(abi) = 3.12
----

Expand the next section header to continue the challenge.

====

== Build with mock from a spec file

[%collapsible]
====

In addition to rebuilding source packages, *mock* is also able to build
directly from a spec file and the corresponding sources. Before you do
this, increment the *Release* in the *pello* spec file using
*rpmdev-bumpspec*, which will also add the appropriate changelog entry.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpmdev-bumpspec --comment 'Rebuild' SPECS/pello.spec
----

Use *mock* to build *pello* for RHEL 8 from the *pello* spec file and
the *SOURCES* directory. This will be a bit faster than the first time
you ran *mock* thanks to the chroot being cached, although still not
quite as fast as running *rpmbuild* directly.

[source,bash,run]
----
mock --root rhel-8-x86_64 --spec SPECS/pello.spec --sources SOURCES
----

[source,nocopy]
----
### OUTPUT ABRIDGED ###
Wrote: /builddir/build/RPMS/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.noarch.rpm
Finish: rpmbuild pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
Finish: build phase for pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
INFO: Done(/var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm) Config(rhel-8-x86_64) 0 minutes 12 seconds
INFO: Results and/or logs in: /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result
Finish: run
----

Use *rpm* to inspect the resulting package.

[source,bash,run]
----
rpm --query --info --package /var/lib/mock/rhel-8-x86_64/result/pello-1.0.4-2.el8.noarch.rpm
----

[source,nocopy]
----
Name        : pello
Version     : 1.0.4
Release     : 2.el8
Architecture: noarch
Install Date: (not installed)
Group       : Unspecified
Size        : 7359
License     : MIT
Signature   : (none)
Source RPM  : pello-1.0.4-2.el8.src.rpm
Build Date  : Fri 26 Jan 2024 07:50:11 AM UTC
Build Host  : localhost.localdomain
URL         : https://github.com/fedora-python/Pello
Summary     : An example Python Hello World package
Description :
Pello is an example package that will be used as a part of Fedora Python
Packaging Guidelines.  The only thing that this package does is printing
Hello World! on the command line.
----

That concludes this challenge, which is the final challenge for this
track.

====
